recipes/tofu-scramble.md, before:

---
id: tofu-scramble
name: Tofu Scramble
description: A spiced, eggy tofu scramble with kala namak and chipotle
servings: 2
time: 20
difficulty: easy
tags: [vegan, breakfast]
author: James
date: 2026-02-17
---

# Notes

Press the tofu for at least 24 hours to extract all the water. The drier the tofu, the better it will brown. Kala namak (Indian black salt) is the secret ingredient — it gives the scramble its eggy flavour. You can find it at Indian grocery stores or online.

# Ingredients

## Pantry

- 1 tbsp olive oil
- 2 tbsp nutritional yeast
- 1 tbsp tahini

## Fridge

- 400 g firm tofu (pressed for 24h)
- 120 ml full-fat oat milk (or creamy plant milk)
- 1 tbsp plant-based yogurt (optional)

## Spices

- 1/2 tsp ground turmeric
- 1/2 tsp garlic powder
- 1/2 tsp onion powder
- 1/2 tsp paprika
- 1/2 tsp chipotle chile flakes
- 1 tsp kala namak (Indian black salt)
- Freshly cracked black pepper
- Salt

# Instructions

1. **Make the eggy sauce.** In a bowl, whisk together the {turmeric}, {garlic powder}, {onion powder}, {paprika}, {chipotle chile flakes}, 1/2 tsp {kala namak}, {tahini}, and {nutritional yeast}. Gradually pour in the {oat milk} and whisk until smooth.
2. Crumble the pressed {tofu} with your hands into chunks — not too big, not too small.
3. Heat a large nonstick frying pan over medium-high heat with the {olive oil}. Once hot, add the tofu and fry until lightly browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir occasionally but not too often to let the exterior crisp up.
4. Pour in the eggy sauce and continue frying until you reach your desired texture and consistency.
5. For extra creaminess, stir in the {plant-based yogurt} and mix through.
6. Finish with a few shakes of {kala namak}. Taste and add a pinch of {salt} and {black pepper} if needed.

Commit message:

Improve tofu scramble recipe
Better description, clearer cooking instructions for moisture level,
and serving suggestions (cherry tomatoes, cucumber, bell pepper, bread).

recipes/tofu-scramble.md, after:

---
id: tofu-scramble
name: Tofu Scramble
description: The perfect egg-free scramble — spiced with kala namak and chipotle, creamy on the inside, crispy on the outside
servings: 2
time: 20
difficulty: easy
tags: [vegan, breakfast]
author: James
date: 2026-02-17
---

# Notes

Press the tofu for at least 24 hours to extract all the water. The drier the tofu, the better it will brown. Kala namak (Indian black salt) is the secret ingredient — it gives the scramble its eggy flavour. You can find it at Indian grocery stores or online.

# Ingredients

## Pantry

- 1 tbsp olive oil
- 2 tbsp nutritional yeast
- 1 tbsp tahini

## Fridge

- 400 g firm tofu (pressed for 24h)
- 120 ml full-fat oat milk (or creamy plant milk)
- 1 tbsp plant-based yogurt (optional)

## Spices

- 1/2 tsp ground turmeric
- 1/2 tsp garlic powder
- 1/2 tsp onion powder
- 1/2 tsp paprika
- 1/2 tsp chipotle chile flakes
- 1 tsp kala namak (Indian black salt)
- Freshly cracked black pepper (optional)

# Instructions

1. **Make the eggy sauce.** In a bowl, whisk together the {turmeric}, {garlic powder}, {onion powder}, {paprika}, {chipotle chile flakes}, {kala namak}, {tahini}, and {nutritional yeast}. Gradually pour in the {oat milk} and whisk until smooth.
2. Crumble the pressed {tofu} with your hands into chunks — not too big, not too small.
3. Heat a large nonstick frying pan over medium-high heat with the {olive oil}. Once hot, add the tofu and fry until lightly browned, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir occasionally but not too often to let the exterior crisp up.
4. Pour in the eggy sauce and continue frying until the scramble is as moist or dry as you like — pull it off the heat early for a soft, creamy scramble, or keep going for firmer, drier curds.
5. For extra creaminess, stir in the {plant-based yogurt} and mix through.
6. Taste and add a pinch {kala namak} and {black pepper} if needed.

# Serving Suggestions

Serve with halved cherry tomatoes, sliced cucumber, bell pepper strips, and toasted crusty bread.
